hello everyone welcome to the next
lecture in the course theory of
computation and in this lecture we'll be
seeing one more example of how to
construct a DFA all right so let's get
started okay so here is the task that we
have to perform construct a DFA that
accepts sets of all strings over 01 of
length two we have to construct a DFA
that accepts
the set of all strings over 01 of length
two okay so let's see how we can do this
but before that let's see what are our
alphabets our alphabet set here
is 0er and one it's already mentioned
here 0 1 and what will be the sets in
our set of strings in our
language alphabet set is 01 and all the
sets sets of strings over 01 of length
two so what are the set of all possible
strings of length two over 01 they are 0
0 0 1 1 Z and 1
one okay so we should construct a DFA
that accepts 0 0 0 1 1 0 and 1 one these
are the only four inputs that should be
accepted by the DFA that we are going to
construct and it should reject all other
strings so let's see how we can do this
okay so to start off we always need to
start with the initial State or the
starting State and let me call it a a is
my initial state or starting State and
how do I indicate that it is a initial
state or starting state by this Arrow
this Arrow which comes from nowhere
pointing to State a indicates that a is
the initial state or starting State okay
now we have to mention what happens if a
gets the input zero or one
so here it does not matter what is the
starting string it could either be zero
or it could either be one the only
condition is that it should be of length
two so whether I get input zero or one I
send this a to the next state which I
will call
B okay if a gets the input zero
or one it goes to the next state called
State
B okay so at this point when I reach
this state B what is the length of my
string the length of my string is one
why because I was in state a and I just
came to the next state first state
second state so I just came here so I
got input either zero or one so the
length of my string is one at this point
in B Okay so
now we have to mention what happens if I
get either input zero or one in state B
again the order does not matter
so I send this B to the next state which
I will call State
C whether I get input 0o or one in state
B I send it to the next state which I
call State C and at this point when I
reach State C what is the length of my
string
here when I came from A to B the length
of my string was one and when I go from
B to C what is the length of my string
it is two because I have already got two
inputs so and the DFA that we construct
should accept all strings of length two
so if it reaches here the length is two
that means that should be the accepting
State or the final state so I have to
put a double circle around this C
indicating that this is the fin final
state right so here at this point the
length of my string is two and that is
the final State or the accepting State
well and
fine okay but is this DFA complete no
it's not complete why is it not complete
because I have already mentioned what
happens if I get zero or one input for a
I've also mentioned the same thing for B
but what about c c is not complete I did
not mention what happens if I get an
input again in C so what
happens whether I get input zero or one
in state C I will send it to another
state which I will call State
D okay whether I get input zero or one I
send it to State
D and in the state D this also is not
complete because I did not mention what
will happen to State d whether it gets
zero or one so I give a s Loop to State
D saying
that whether I get input 0o or 1 it
stays in state D itself okay it stays in
state D itself now what is the meaning
of this so at this point when I reach
State C I already got the length of my
string S2 now if I get another input the
length of my string becomes three and
that should not be accepted so it goes
to this State D and after reaching State
D whatever input you get it stays in
state D and from State D there is no
possibility of coming back to this state
C which is the final state so if
anything goes out of this state C it
stays here and it is trapped here not
being able to reach the final State
anymore so any string of length more
than two it goes to State D and it is
trapped here and it will never be
accepted so this state d Here is known
as the Deb state it is known as Deb
state or it's also known as trap
State
okay
so now my DFA is complete because I have
mentioned for every state what happens
when I get a particular input either 0
over one now I have successfully
designed the DFA that accepts sets of
all string over 01 two all right I hope
that was clear now let us take a few
examples and check if this is working if
this is correct so here we'll take a few
examples so for my first example let me
check the string 0 0 so 0 0 should be
accepted actually right 0 0 is present
here and it is of length two so it
should be accepted so let's see it will
be accepted or not so we always have to
start with our starting state which is
State a
this is my state a I'm starting from
here and the first input is zero so I
get input zero in state a and what
happens when a gets the input zero it
goes to State B all right goes to State
B and what is the next input the next
input is again zero right zero I'm in
state B right now and I get input zero
so in state B if I get input zero where
does it go it goes to State C goes to
State C
and now I've reached the end of the
string and at the end of the string I am
in state C and is State C the final
State yes it has a double circle which
means it is
the
final State now since State C is the
final
State this is accepted whenever a string
reaches the final
state it shows that it is accepted so 0
0 is accepted right now let's check
another
one's check for all right we check for 0
let's say for one Z Now 1 0 again I
start from my initial State a and the
first input is one so on getting input
one what happens to State a state a on
getting input one it goes to State B
right and now the next input is zero so
what happens I am in state B and I get
input zero I inan State B and I get
input zero it goes to State C goes to
State C and I have to end of the string
and at the end of the string where am I
I am in state C I'm in state C and is C
the final State obviously it is it is
the final state so this is also accepted
why because it reached the final state
so far so
good okay now let's check for a longer
string which
is 0 01 let's see if this will be
accepted or not again I start from my
initial State a first input is zero so I
get zero what
happens in a if I get zero it goes to B
goes to B and now I am in B and the next
input I get is again zero so when I get
the input zero in B it goes to State
C right and again I have one more input
here which is one so on I'm in state C
and when I get input one in state C what
happens it goes to State
D now I have reached the end of the
string and where am I right now I am in
state D and is D the final State no
there is no double circle here that
means D is not the final State
not
final state so 001 is not
accepted all right now let's take one
more small example for the last let's
check for just one
okay my string is one I start from a
which is my initial state or starting
State and I get input one I get input
one so when a gets input one it goes to
State b b and that is the end of the
string and I am at State B at the end
and is B the final State no there is no
double circle around B so B is also not
the final
state so one is also not accepted so we
see that whenever a string was of length
two like here 1 2 1 two it was accepted
and whenever it was of lengths other
than two like for example here it was
three it was rejected here it was just
one it was rejected so we have
successfully constructed a DFA that
accepts all sets of strings over 01 of
length two okay so I hope that was clear
I hope you understood so thank you for
watching and see you in the next
[Music]
one